






































Syllabus


COMP 474/6741 Intelligent Systems
Dept. of Computer Science Syllabus – Winter 2022 Concordia University
and Software Engineering Page 1 of 4 COMP 474/6741 (4 credits)

Lectures: Online (pre-recorded) or on-campus Labs: Online (Zoom) or on-campus
Instructor: Dr. René Witte (Associate Professor) Office: Online (Zoom) or on-campus
Email: rene.witte@concordia.ca Office hours: scheduled on Moodle

Calendar Course Description
(COMP 474): Prerequisite: COMP 352 or COEN 352. Rule-based expert systems, blackboard architecture, and
agent-based.  Knowledge  acquisition  and  representation.  Uncertainty  and  conflict  resolution.  Reasoning  and
explanation. Design of intelligent systems. Project. Lectures: three hours per week. Laboratory: two hours per
week.

(COMP  6741): Knowledge  representation  and  reasoning.  Uncertainty  and  conflict  resolution.  Design  of
intelligent systems. Grammar-based, rule-based, and blackboard architectures. A project is required. Laboratory:
two hours per week.

Prerequisite Knowledge
You must be familiar with programming in an object-oriented language, such as Java or Python (we will provide a
brief introduction to Python as part of the first lab session). Previous knowledge of Artificial Intelligence (AI),
Natural Language Processing (NLP), Information Retrieval (IR), and/or Machine Learning (ML) is helpful, but
not required.

Objectives
The goal of this course is to become familiar with modern “intelligent” (Artificial Intelligence, AI)-based software
systems, that is, software that incorporates algorithms or methods from one of the fields mentioned above (AI,
ML, NLP, IR), in whole or part. Compared to other courses introducing these concepts, this IS course places a
stronger  emphasis  on  the  overall  design,  implementation  and  evaluation  of  a  complete  AI  application.  In
particular,  we  will  examine  modern  intelligent  assistants,  including  chatbots,  and  study  their  foundations  in
Natural Language Processing, Knowledge Graphs, and Personalization.

General Information
The course will start online for at least the first two weeks of the term. Changes to the delivery format (online vs.
on-campus) will be announced on the course Moodle web site.

This course has weekly lectures and lab sessions. For each week, lecture slides will be made available through the
course Moodle web site. During remote delivery, pre-recorded lectures will be published on Moodle for each
week. 

For most lectures,  worksheets will be provided that you must go through while following the lecture material.
While  the  course  is  offered  online,  you  can  post  your  answers  on  Moodle  to  receive  feedback  (detailed
instructions will be provided on Moodle); otherwise, they will be used in class.

Additional online activities and office hours will also be announced and scheduled on Moodle.

Course Moodle Web Site
Amendments to this syllabus, if any, as well as other important information will be made available through the
course's Moodle site. The Moodle site also provides additional reading material, as well as discussion forums for
asking questions on lecture topics, the project, exams, etc. Note that you must be registered for the course to
access the Moodle site (there is a one-day delay between registering and receiving Moodle access).



COMP 474/6741 Intelligent Systems
Dept. of Computer Science Syllabus – Winter 2022 Concordia University
and Software Engineering Page 2 of 4 COMP 474/6741 (4 credits)

Evaluation
Your grade will be based on exams and a team project (split into multiple submissions). The format of the exams
will  depends on the delivery format  of  course:  online Moodle Quizzes if  the  course  continues  to  be offered
remote, otherwise on-campus exams, or a mix of both. The distribution of these deliverables is as follows:

40% Course Project (split into several assignments)
60% Exams (On-campus mid-term/final and/or online Moodle Quizzes)
 

There is no standard relationship between percentages and letter grades assigned for this course. In order to pass
the course you must receive at least 50% of the overall possible marks.

Should you fail to write one of the quizzes/mid-term exams and you have valid justification (e.g., doctor’s note)
then the weight of the missed quiz/midterm will be added to the other quizzes/final exam.

Note: It is your responsibility to adhere to the university’s code of conduct as detailed in the academic calendar.

Conditions Specific to Remote Teaching and Assessment
1 All students are expected to have access to a computer with the following capabilities:

1.a reliable internet connection
1.b camera and microphone (your computer and/or cellphone)

2 All  students  should  install  VPN  for  remote  desktop  access  to  Concordia  University  computer  labs
https://www.concordia.ca/it/support/connect-from-home.html
Once you have VPN connection to Concordia University, you can access all available software in Gina
Cody School labs by following the process described in:
https://www.concordia.ca/ginacody/aits/support/faq/connect-from-home.html

3 Course specific software: You should install the Python programming language, together with a suitable
IDE. Further details on the required course software will be available on the course Moodle web site.

4 If the course continues to be delivered remotely, all students will be required to do online, timed exams:
4.a Exams will be done through Moodle Quiz.
4.b The exams will  take place during the  lecture time period  on dates that will  be announced on

Moodle at least a week in advance.
4.c You will be responsible for ensuring appropriate, properly functioning technology (webcam, a

microphone, appropriate browser and an ability to download any necessary software, as well as a
reliable internet connection with a minimum of a 3G connection).

4.d You  will  need  a  quiet  place  within  which  to  take  the  quizzes.  Earplugs  or  noise-canceling
headphones that are not connected to a device may also be used to allow you to focus for the
duration of the exam.

4.e The  course  instructor  reserves  the  right  to  conduct  an  individual  oral  examination  to  verify
student’s response to online exam, project, or assignment questions.

5 Academic Integrity
Violation  of  the  Academic Code  of  Conduct  in  any form will  be  severely dealt  with.  This  includes
copying (even with modifications) of  program segments.  You must  demonstrate  independent  thought
through your submitted work. The Academic Code of Conduct of Concordia University is available at:
https://www.concordia.ca/conduct/academic-integrity.html

It is expected that during class discussions, in the online forums and in your written assignments you will
communicate constructively and respectfully. Sexist, racist, homophobic, ageist, and ablest expressions
will not be tolerated.

All students must read and sign the Expectations of Originality form and submit the signed copy with their
assignments and project.

https://www.concordia.ca/it/support/connect-from-home.html
https://www.concordia.ca/content/dam/ginacody/docs/Expectations-of-Originality-Feb14-2012.pdf
https://www.concordia.ca/conduct/academic-integrity.html
http://www.concordia.ca/ctl/digital-teaching/using-moodle/assignments.html
https://www.concordia.ca/ginacody/aits/support/faq/connect-from-home.html


COMP 474/6741 Intelligent Systems
Dept. of Computer Science Syllabus – Winter 2022 Concordia University
and Software Engineering Page 3 of 4 COMP 474/6741 (4 credits)

Course Content and Schedule
We will cover the following topic(s) in each week (note that the weekly schedule may be subject to change): 

(Week 1)   Introduction to Intelligent Systems
(Week 2)   Introduction to Knowledge Graphs (RDF)
(Week 3)   Knowledge Graphs: Vocabularies & Ontologies (RDFS, OWL)
(Week 4)   Knowledge Base Queries (SPARQL)
(Week 5)   Linked Open Data (LOD) & Applications
(Week 6)   Personalization & Recommender Systems
(Week 7)   Introduction to Machine Learning for Intelligent Systems
(Week 8)   Intelligent Agents: Chatbots & Introduction to Natural Language Processing (NLP)
(Week 9)   NLP Applications & Text Mining Systems
(Week 10) Introduction to Artificial Neural Networks
(Week 11) Introduction to Deep Learning
(Week 12) Deep Learning for Intelligent Systems
(Week 13) Conclusions 

There will not be time to cover all of these topics in-depth. Other topics of interest to the class may also be
included. A more detailed week-by-week breakdown, as well as additional information for each topic, will be
available on the Moodle website.

Textbook
There is no single textbook for this course; readings for each lecture topic will be provided on Moodle. Generally,
these readings will be available online or as an electronic resource through the Concordia Library.

Lab Sessions
There will be a weekly lab session, starting Week 2. Note that lab sessions are a mandatory part of the course. Lab
sessions will be either online (remote) or on-campus:

1. Remote lab sessions take place online,  during the dedicated lab time slots,  using Zoom and are  not
recorded.

2. On-campus lab sessions take place as scheduled and you have to attend the section (room, time) you are
registered in.

Please confirm on Moodle whether the lab sessions for a given week take place on-campus or online.

The weekly lab sessions generally cover the lecture material from the previous week. It is a prerequisite before
attending each lab that you studies the lecture material, readings, and worked on the corresponding worksheet
from the week before.

Course Project
As part of the course, you will work on a project developing an intelligent software system. The project is split
into multiple project assignments that build on each other and you will have to demo your project as a team during
dedicated online (Zoom) or on-campus sessions. You can work on the project in teams as follows:

• Students in COMP 474 can do the projects in teams of at most 4.
• Students in COMP 6741 must do the project in teams of 2.

Note: Mixed teams (including both graduate and undergraduate students) are not possible.

Disclaimer
In the event of extraordinary circumstances beyond the University's control, the content and/or evaluation scheme
in this course is subject to change.



COMP 474/6741 Intelligent Systems
Dept. of Computer Science Syllabus – Winter 2022 Concordia University
and Software Engineering Page 4 of 4 COMP 474/6741 (4 credits)

On Campus Resources

HEALTH SERVICES

An on-campus health clinic and health promotion center with 
nurses and doctors.

SGW 514-848-2424 ext. 3565

LOY 514-848-2424 ext. 3575

COUNSELLING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES

Counsellors (licensed mental health professionals)  work with
students to address their mental health and wellbeing needs.

SGW 514-848-2424 ext. 3545

LOY 514 848-2424 ext. 3555

ACCESS CENTRE FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES

Supports students with a variety of disability conditions (including 
temporary disabilities arising from illness or injury). Students 
receive academic support for their educational experience at 
Concordia.

acsdinfo@concordia.ca 514-848-2424 ext. 3525

SEXUAL ASSAULT RESOURCE CENTRE

Provides confidential and non-judgemental support and services 
to students, staff and faculty of all genders and orientations 
affected by sexual violence and/or harassment.

Jennifer Drummond, Coordinator

jennifer.drummond@concordia.ca 
sarc@concordia.ca

514-848-2424 ext. 3353

STUDENT SUCCESS CENTRE

Support network from first-year to graduation. You’ll find one-on-
one tutors, study groups, workshops as well as learning and 
career advisors

514-848-2424, ext. 3921

DEAN OF STUDENTS

Supports students to enhance their Concordia experience by 
engaging in student life outside the classroom.

Terry Kyle, Manager

deanof      s      tuden      t      s.office@conco      r  dia.ca   SGW 514-848-2424 ext. 
3517

LOY 514-848-2424 ext. 4239

ABORIGINAL STUDENT RESOURCE CENTRE

An on-campus resource for First Nations, Métis and Inuit students
that helps them make the most of the many resources available at
the university.

Orenda Konwawennotion Boucher-Curotte, Coordinator

orenda.boucher@concordia.ca 514-848-2424 ext. 
7327

INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS OFFICE

Supporting international students with immigration documents, 
health insurance, social events, and workshops.

iso@concordia.ca

514-848-2424 ext. 3515

STUDENT ADVOCACY OFFICE

Advocating for students facing charges under
the Academic Code of Conduct or the Code of Rights and 
Responsibilities.

studentadvocates@concordia.ca 514-848-2424, ext. 
3992

MULTI-FAITH & SPIRITUALITY CENTRE

Provides a home for all those wishing to celebrate the  human
spirit in the widest sense of the word, through programs, events
and a quiet space for reflection.

Ellie Hummel, Coordinator

mfsc@concordia.ca

514-848-2424, ext. 3593

CAMPUS SECURITY

Ensures the safety of our members and campus property through 
prevention, surveillance, intervention, training, and education. 
Provides emergency medical services.

security@concordia.ca 514-848-3717
(dial 1 for urgent situations; dial 2 for non-urgent situations)

CONCORDIA UNIVERSITY STUDENT PARENTS CENTRE

An accessible space for student parents to study, share interests 
and develop a support network.

Sumaiya Gangat, Coordinator

cusp@concordia.ca

514-848-2424, ext. 2431

mailto:cusp@concordia.ca
mailto:security@concordia.ca
mailto:mfsc@concordia.ca
mailto:studentadvocates@concordia.ca
mailto:iso@concordia.ca
mailto:orenda.boucher@concordia.ca
mailto:deanofstudents.office@concordia.ca
mailto:deanofstudents.office@concordia.ca
mailto:deanofstudents.office@concordia.ca
mailto:deanofstudents.office@concordia.ca
mailto:deanofstudents.office@concordia.ca
mailto:deanofstudents.office@concordia.ca
mailto:deanofstudents.office@concordia.ca
mailto:sarc@concordia.ca
mailto:jennifer.drummond@concordia.ca
mailto:acsdinfo@concordia.ca

	Calendar Course Description
	Prerequisite Knowledge
	Objectives
	General Information
	Course Moodle Web Site
	Evaluation
	Conditions Specific to Remote Teaching and Assessment
	Course Content and Schedule
	Textbook
	Lab Sessions
	Course Project
	Disclaimer
	On Campus Resources

