COMP 6721 Applied Artificial Intelligence Dept. of Computer Science Syllabus – Winter 2022 Concordia University and Software Engineering Page 1 of 4 COMP 6721 (4 credits) Lectures: Online (pre-recorded) or on-campus Labs: Online (Zoom) or on-campus Instructor: Dr. René Witte (Associate Professor) Office: Online (Zoom) or on-campus Email: rene.witte@concordia.ca Office hours: scheduled on Moodle Calendar Course Description The   course   covers   heuristic   and   adversarial   searches   for   concrete   applications.   It   then   discusses   automated reasoning,   advanced   knowledge   representation   and   dealing   with   uncertainty   for   Artificial   Intelligence applications. Finally, it introduces autoencoders, recurrent neural networks and sequence to sequence models. A project is required. Laboratory: two hours per week. Objectives The   purpose   of   the   course   is   to   provide   a   broad   technical   introduction   of   the   core   concepts   of   Artificial Intelligence   (AI).   Topics   include:   state-space   search   (uninformed   and   informed/heuristic   search),   adversarial search,   machine   learning   (ML),   natural   language   processing   (NLP),   artificial   neural   networks,   deep   learning, knowledge graphs & intelligent agent design. It is intended as an overview or first introduction to AI, as there are dedicated courses covering ML, NLP, Intelligent Systems and other areas introduced here in more detail. Prerequisite Knowledge For the lab sessions, assignments and course project, you must be familiar with general programming in Python (we will provide a brief introduction to Python as part of the first lab session). Several course topics require a solid grasp of mathematical foundations, in particular probability theory and linear algebra.  General Information The course will start online for at least the first two weeks of the term. Changes to the delivery format (online vs. on-campus) will be announced on the course Moodle web site. This course has weekly lectures and lab sessions. For each week, lecture slides will be made available through the course Moodle web site. During remote delivery, pre-recorded lectures will be published on Moodle for each week.  For most lectures,  worksheets  will be provided that you must go through while following the lecture material. While   the   course   is   offered   online,   you   can   post   your   answers   on   Moodle   to   receive   feedback   (detailed instructions will be provided on Moodle); otherwise, they will be used in class. Additional online activities and office hours will also be announced and scheduled on Moodle. Textbook There is no single textbook that will be used for this course. For each lecture topic, required and recommended readings will be posted as part of the lecture information on Moodle. Generally, these readings will be available online or as an electronic resource through the Concordia Library. Moodle Web Site Amendments to this syllabus, if any, as well as other important information will be made available through the course's Moodle site. The Moodle site also provides additional reading material, as well as discussion forums for asking questions on lecture topics,  the  project,  quizzes, etc.  Note that you must be registered for the course to access the Moodle site (there is typically a one-day delay between registering and receiving Moodle access). BreakPage COMP 6721 Applied Artificial Intelligence Dept. of Computer Science Syllabus – Winter 2022 Concordia University and Software Engineering Page 2 of 4 COMP 6721 (4 credits) Evaluation Your   grade   will   be   based   on   both   individual   assignments,   as   well   as   a   team   project   (split   into   multiple submissions). Additionally, there will be exams, where the format depends on the delivery format (online on Moodle   if   the   course   continues   to   be   offered   remote,   otherwise   on-campus   exams,   or   a   mix   of   both).   The distribution of these deliverables is as follows: 15% Assignments (individual work) 40% Course Project (team work, split into multiple submissions) 45% Exams (On-campus mid-term/final and/or online Moodle Quizzes)    There is no standard relationship between percentages and letter grades assigned for this course. In order to  pass the course you must receive at least 50% of the overall possible marks. Should you fail to write one of the quizzes/mid-term exams and you have valid justification (e.g., doctor’s note) then the weight of the missed quiz/midterm will be added to the other quizzes/final exam. Note: It is your responsibility to adhere to the university’s code of conduct as detailed in the calendar. Conditions Specific to Remote Teaching and Assessment 1 All students are expected to have access to a computer with the following capabilities: 1.a reliable internet connection 1.b camera and microphone (your computer and/or cellphone) 2 All   students   should   install   VPN   for   remote   desktop   access   to   Concordia   University   computer   labs https://www.concordia.ca/it/support/connect-from-home.html Once you have VPN connection to Concordia University, you can access all available software in Gina Cody School labs by following the process described in: https://www.concordia.ca/ginacody/aits/support/faq/connect-from-home.html 3 Course specific software: You should install the Python programming language, together with a suitable IDE. Further details on the required course software will be available on the course Moodle web site. 4 If the course continues to be delivered remotely, all students will be required to do online, timed exams: 4.a Exams will be done through Moodle Quiz. 4.b The  exams will take place during the  lecture time period  on dates that will be announced on Moodle at least a week in advance. 4.c You will be responsible for ensuring appropriate, properly functioning technology (webcam, a microphone, appropriate browser and an ability to download any necessary software, as well as a reliable internet connection with a minimum of a 3G connection). 4.d You   will   need   a   quiet   place   within   which   to   take   the   quizzes.   Earplugs   or   noise-canceling headphones that are not connected to a device may also be used to allow you to focus for the duration of the exam. 4.e The   course   instructor   reserves   the   right   to   conduct   an   individual   oral   examination   to   verify student’s response to online exam, project, or assignment questions. 5 Academic Integrity Violation   of   the   Academic   Code   of   Conduct   in   any   form   will   be   severely   dealt   with.   This   includes copying   (even  with   modifications)   of   program   segments.   You   must   demonstrate   independent   thought through your submitted work. The Academic Code of Conduct of Concordia University is available at: https://www.concordia.ca/conduct/academic-integrity.html It is expected that during class discussions, in the online forums and in your written assignments you will communicate constructively and respectfully. Sexist, racist, homophobic, ageist, and ablest expressions will not be tolerated. All students must read and sign the Expectations of Originality form and submit the signed copy with their assignments and project. BreakPage COMP 6721 Applied Artificial Intelligence Dept. of Computer Science Syllabus – Winter 2022 Concordia University and Software Engineering Page 3 of 4 COMP 6721 (4 credits) Course Content and Schedule We  will  cover  the  following topic(s)  in  each lecture  week  (note  that  the  weekly schedule  may be  subject  to change):  (Week 1)    Introduction to AI: Overview & History (Week 2)    State-Space Search: Uninformed & Heuristic Search (Week 3)    Adversarial Search: Mini-Max & Alpha-Beta Pruning (Week 4)    Introduction to Machine Learning (ML), Naïve Bayes Classifier (Week 5)    ML: Decision Trees, Evaluation & Unsupervised Learning (Week 6)    Introduction to Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) (Week 7)    Introduction to Deep Learning, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) (Week 8)    Knowledge Graphs & Intelligent Agents (I) (Week 9)    Knowledge Graphs & Intelligent Agents (II) (Week 10)  Introduction to Natural Language Processing (NLP) (Week 11)  NLP: Vector Space Model, Applications (Week 12)  Deep Learning for NLP (Week 13)  Conclusions There will not be time to cover all of these topics in depth. Other topics of interest to the class may also be included. A more detailed week-by-week breakdown, as well as additional information for each topic, will be available on the Moodle web site. Course Project As part of the course, you will work on an AI project related to the topics covered in the lectures. In addition to submitting  your   project   (through  Moodle),   you  will   have   to  demo  it   during  dedicated  ( online   or   on-campus) sessions. Details on the project will be announced in class and on Moodle. The project is team work. Lab Sessions There will be a weekly lab session, starting Week 2. Note that lab sessions are a mandatory part of the course. Lab sessions will be either online (remote) or on-campus: 1. Remote   lab   sessions   take   place   online,   during   the   dedicated   lab   time   slots,   using   Zoom   and   are  not recorded. 2. On-campus lab sessions take place as scheduled and you have to attend the section (room, time) you are registered in. Please confirm on Moodle whether the lab sessions for a given week take place on-campus or online. The weekly lab sessions generally cover the lecture material from the previous week. It is a prerequisite before attending each lab that you studies the lecture material, readings, and worked on the corresponding worksheet from the week before. Disclaimer In the event of extraordinary circumstances beyond the University's control, the content and/or evaluation scheme  in this course is subject to change. BreakPage COMP 6721 Applied Artificial Intelligence Dept. of Computer Science Syllabus – Winter 2022 Concordia University and Software Engineering Page 4 of 4 COMP 6721 (4 credits) On Campus Resources HEALTH SERVICES COUNSELLING AND PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES An on-campus health clinic and health promotion center with  Counsellors  (licensed  mental  health  professionals)   work  with nurses and doctors. students to address their mental health and wellbeing needs. SGW 514-848-2424 ext. 3565 SGW 514-848-2424 ext. 3545 LOY 514-848-2424 ext. 3575 LOY 514 848-2424 ext. 3555 ACCESS CENTRE FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES SEXUAL ASSAULT RESOURCE CENTRE Supports students with a variety of disability conditions (including  Provides confidential and non-judgemental support and services  temporary disabilities arising from illness or injury). Students  to students, staff and faculty of all genders and orientations  receive academic support for their educational experience at  affected by sexual violence and/or harassment. Concordia. Jennifer Drummond, Coordinator acsdinfo@concordia.ca 514-848-2424 ext. 3525 jennifer.drummond@concordia.ca  sarc@concordia.ca 514-848-2424 ext. 3353 STUDENT SUCCESS CENTRE DEAN OF STUDENTS Support network from first-year to graduation. You’ll find one-on- Supports students to enhance their Concordia experience by  one tutors, study groups, workshops as well as learning and  engaging in student life outside the classroom. career advisors Terry Kyle, Manager 514-848-2424, ext. 3921  deano f     s      tuden       t     s.office@conco       r dia.ca  SGW 514-848-2424 ext.  3517 LOY 514-848-2424 ext. 4239 ABORIGINAL STUDENT RESOURCE CENTRE INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS OFFICE An on-campus resource for First Nations, Métis and Inuit students Supporting international students with immigration documents,  that helps them make the most of the many resources available at health insurance, social events, and workshops. the university. iso@concordia.ca Orenda Konwawennotion Boucher-Curotte, Coordinator 514-848-2424 ext. 3515 orenda.boucher@concordia.ca 514-848-2424 ext.  7327 STUDENT ADVOCACY OFFICE MULTI-FAITH & SPIRITUALITY CENTRE Advocating for students facing charges under Provides  a  home  for  all  those  wishing  to  celebrate  the  human the Academic Code of Conduct or the Code of Rights and  spirit in the widest sense of the word, through programs, events Responsibilities. and a quiet space for reflection. studentadvocates@concordia.ca 514-848-2424, ext.  Ellie Hummel, Coordinator mfsc@concordia.ca 3992 514-848-2424, ext. 3593 CAMPUS SECURITY CONCORDIA UNIVERSITY STUDENT PARENTS CENTRE Ensures the safety of our members and campus property through  An accessible space for student parents to study, share interests  prevention, surveillance, intervention, training, and education.  and develop a support network. Provides emergency medical services. Sumaiya Gangat, Coordinator security@concordia.ca 514-848-3717 cusp@concordia.ca (dial 1 for urgent situations; dial 2 for non-urgent situations) 514-848-2424, ext. 2431 BreakPage 