Artificial Intelligence:  Introduction 1 BreakPage Today The current “AI Hype” 1. Important questions 2. What is artificial intelligence? a) What is intelligence? b) Is there a test for intelligence? c) What do we do in AI? 3. History of AI 4. An example: Eliza 5. 2 BreakPage The current “AI Hype”  Major breakthroughs in many AI  topics  Thanks to a  technique called Deep Learning https://towardsdatascience.com/cousins-of-artificial-intelligence-dda4edc27b55 BreakPage Recent Breakthroughs BreakPage Recent Breakthroughs BreakPage Recent Breakthroughs BreakPage Today The current “AI Hype” 1. Important questions 2. What is artificial intelligence? a) What is intelligence? b) Is there a test for intelligence? c) What do we do in AI? 3. History of AI 4. An example: Eliza 5. 7 BreakPage 1. What is artificial intelligence?  No standard definition of AI  among those working in the field   AI has even been defined as: “… the collection of problems and methodologies studied by artificial intelligence researchers." - Luger and StubbleField 8 BreakPage Other Definitions Machines that think like humans  The exciting new effort to make computers think… machines with minds, in the full and  literal sense (Haugeland, 1985)  The automation of activities that we associate with human thinking, activities such as  decision-making, problem solving, learning… (Bellmann 1978) Machines that act like humans  The art of creating machines that perform functions that require intelligence when  performed by people (Kurzweil, 1990)  The study of how to make computers do things at which, at the moment, people are  better. (Rich and Knight, 1991) Machines that think intelligently  The study of mental faculties through the use of computational models (Charniak and  McDermott, 1985)  The study of the computations that make it possible to perceive, reason, and act  (Winston, 1992) Machines that act intelligently  A field of study that seeks to explain and emulate intelligent behavior in terms in  terms of computational processes (Schalkoff, 1990)  The branch of computer science that is concerned with the automation of intelligent  behavior (Luger & Stubblefield, 1993) 9 BreakPage Approaches to AI:  Engineering VS Cognitive Approach    Engineering Approach:   Tries to find optimal solutions  No matter how (not necessarily what human do)  Cognitive Approach:  Tries to understand the process  Tries to reproduce human behavior (even if wrong result)  4 points of view: Systems that can… Cognitive  Engineering / Rational  approach approach Behavior act like humans act intelligently Reasoning think like humans think intelligently 10 BreakPage Approaches to AI: Weak VS Strong AI  Weak AI :  A system whose capabilities are not intended to  match or exceed the capabilities of human beings.  A system can demonstrate intelligence, but does not  necessarily have a mind, mental states or consciousness.   Usually, a small application with a single purpose  Strong AI:   typically used in science fiction  A system that matches or exceeds human intelligence.   A system that could have: consciousness, self-awareness, the  ability to feel sentiments,  …  Usually, a “general purpose” application capable of several  tasks 11 BreakPage Today  The current “AI Hype”  Important questions What is artificial intelligence? 1. What is intelligence? 2. Is there a test for intelligence?  3.  What do we do in AI?  History of AI  An example: Eliza 12 BreakPage What is Intelligence, Anyways?  are you intelligent if you:  can do complex arithmetic quickly?  humans are bad at it  … but computers are good at it  can recognize a face in a picture?  humans are good at it  … but hard to automate in a computer  hold a 15 min. conversation?   humans are good at it  … but really hard to automate in a computer 13 BreakPage What is Intelligence?  intellectual vs physical capabilities  a dog has a more acute sense of smell…  a bat can see at night…  reflex vs planned/reasoned action  when the female wasp returns to her burrow with food, she first  deposits it on the threshold, checks for intruders inside, and only  then, if the coast is clear, carries her food inside.   but that's instinctual behavior  if the food is moved a few inches away while she is inside: on  emerging, she will repeat the whole procedure as often as the food  is displaced.   awareness of existence (consciousness of itself)   if a system passes a test for intelligence but is not aware of it,  is it intelligent?    but the only way to really know if a machine is thinking is to be  the machine… source of picture http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/8/85/Cicada_Killer_Wasp.jpg 14 BreakPage Is Deep Blue Intelligent?  In 1996 and 1997 IBM's Deep Blue beat the  human chess champion Kasparov in a  six-games match.   But Deep Blue uses:  plain brute force technique   on a massively parallel supercomputer  can explore 200,000,000 positions per second (Kasparov can  examine 3/sec)    Today, emphasis on more intelligent chess programs  in Nov. 2006, Deep Fritz vs. Kramnik, ran on an ordinary   Intel Core 2 Duo CPUs source of image:  http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/c/c6/P11_kasparov_breakout.jpg 15 BreakPage Is Chess Playing Intelligent? “Chess is far easier than innumerable tasks performed by an  infant, such as understanding a simple story, recognizing  objects and their relationships, understanding speech, and so  forth. For these and nearly all realistic AI problems, the  brute force methods in Deep Blue are hopelessly inadequate.”  – David Stork 16 BreakPage Is Watson Intelligent?  In 2011, IBM’s Watson competed on  Jeopardy!  Watson beat Brad Rutter, the biggest all-time money  winner on Jeopardy!, and Ken Jennings, the record  holder for the longest championship streak   Watson received the first prize of $1 million  Watson is a question answering system... "an application  of advanced Natural Language Processing, Information  Retrieval, Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, and  Machine Learning technologies to the field of open  domain question answering” source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Watson_%28artificial_intelligence_software%29 17 BreakPage Is AlphaGo Intelligent? BreakPage Today  Important questions What is artificial intelligence? 1. What is intelligence? 2. Is there a test for intelligence? 3.  What do we do in AI?  History of AI  An example: Eliza 19 BreakPage A Test for Intelligence…  The Turing Test  The “imitation game”  Proposed by Alan Turing in 1950  If a human interrogator cannot tell the  computer and human apart, then the computer  is intelligent  Measures the intelligence of a computer vs. a  human  Turing predicted that by 2000, a machine  might have a 30% chance of fooling a person  for 5 minutes 20 BreakPage The Turing Test  A human mediates between the interrogator and  the machine 21 BreakPage The Turing Test  Some capabilities required to pass the  Turing test:  Natural Language Processing (NLP) to  communicate  Knowledge Representation to store knowledge  Automated Reasoning  to infer new knowledge  Machine Learning  … 22 BreakPage Arguments For the Turing Test  Objective notion of intelligence  Prevents us from arguments about the  computer’s consciousness  Eliminates bias in favor of humans  … 23 BreakPage Arguments Against Turing Test  Not reproducible  Not constructive   Machine intelligence designed w.r.t. humans  test is anthropomorphic. It only tests if the subject  resembles a human being.   unnecessarily restrict machines  ex: x-ray vision, fast computations source of image: 24 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:Weakness_of_Turing_test_1.jpg BreakPage Did anyone pass the Turing Test yet?  The Long Bets Foundation has $20,000 bet between  Mitchell Kapor, founder of Lotus Development,  and   Ray Kurzweil, inventor  Kapor bets that "By 2029 no computer - or "machine  intelligence" - will have passed the Turing Test. “  After more than 60 year ...  ... In 2014, the  <drum roll please>  news reported that a chatbot passed the Turing Test!   But, Kurzweil himself is not convinced... because the  test had restrictions...   the chatbot claimed to be a 13-year-old, and   one for whom English is not a first language 25 BreakPage Current Turing Test CAPTCHA:   Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers  and Humans Apart   the system asks a user to complete a test which the  computer is able to generate and grade, but not able to  solve.   Because computers are unable to solve the CAPTCHA, any  user entering a correct solution is presumed to be human.  also known as reverse Turing test, because it is:  given by a machine and targeted to a human  in contrast to the Turing test that is given by a human and  targeted to a machine. source of image:  http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/b/b6/Modern-captcha.jpg 26 BreakPage Today  The current “AI Hype”  Important questions What is artificial intelligence? 1. What is intelligence? 2. Is there a test for intelligence? 3.  What do we do in AI?  History of AI  An example: Eliza 27 BreakPage What do we do in AI?  Knowledge representation  (including formal logic) Agent Perception  Search, especially  Robotics heuristic search  (puzzles, games) Reasoning  Planning Search Learning  Reasoning under  uncertainty, including  probabilistic reasoning Knowledge Constraint rep.  Learning Planning satisfaction     Agent architectures  Robotics and perception  Natural language  Natural ... Expert processing language Systems  ... 26 BreakPage The Periodic Table Of AI https://www.datasciencecentral.com/profiles/blogs/the-periodic-table-of-ai BreakPage Successes of AI…  A few years ago, all these were considered AI  problems… now, no one thinks of them as AI  OCR – Optical Character Recognition  Speech Recognition  Information Retrieval  Spell checker and Grammar checker  Expert Systems  Data Mining  Word Prediction  … 32 BreakPage Some Successes of AI…  A more  pragmatic definition of AI today :  "AI research is that which computing scientists do not know how  to do cost-effectively today.”  33 BreakPage  BreakPage What do we do in AI? BreakPage Today  Important questions What is artificial intelligence? 1. What is intelligence? 2. Is there a test for intelligence? 3.  What do we do in AI?  History of AI  An example: Eliza 36 BreakPage History of AI BreakPage  BreakPage  BreakPage Unrealistic Predictions BreakPage Example of a Toy-World  toy-world = micro-word  1973: Winograd developed SHRDLU to understand  English sentences in a restricted world and carried  out instructions typed in English with a robot arm. 43 BreakPage History of AI  Reality hits (late 60s - early 70s)  1966: the ALPAC report kills work in machine translation (and  NLP in general)  People realized that scaling up from micro-worlds (toy- worlds) to reality is not just a manner of faster machines and  larger memories…   Minsky & Papert’s paper on the limits of perceptrons (cannot  learn just any function…) kills work in neural networks   in 1971, the British government stops funding research in AI  due to no significant results  it’s the first major AI Winter… https://www.vectorstock.com/royalty-free-vector/freezing-snowman-vector-689086 46 BreakPage  BreakPage  BreakPage  BreakPage  BreakPage Today  Important questions What is artificial intelligence? 1. What is intelligence? 2. Is there a test for intelligence? 3.  What do we do in AI?  History of AI  An example: Eliza 54 BreakPage Eliza I A F O G  Developed by Joseph Weizenbaum   In the 1960’s   Simulation of a dialogue with a psychologist   Great success at the time  Led at least one psychologist to seriously suggest  that computers might help alleviate the shortage of  trained psychotherapists (!)  Weizenbaum later questioned his own work and  became one of the field’s biggest critics 55 BreakPage Eliza is...  An example of a simple production system (see later for a discussion of this type of systems)  Example dialogs with our new  psychotherapist... 56 BreakPage Session with Eliza  I am the psychotherapist.  Please, describe your problems.  Each time you  are finished talking, type RET twice.  I am very unhappy these days  Are you unhappy often?  Always after the new classes start  Tell me about your classes.  I am registered for artificial intelligence  Why do you say you are registered for artificial intelligence?  I feel I should understand more about AI  Earlier you said you felt unhappy?  I am unhappy because of the examinations  Are you sure that is the real reason?  Not really  Maybe the examinations have something to do with this.  This could be one of the reasons  Is it because of your plans that you say this could be one of the reasons? 57 BreakPage How does Eliza work?  See Weizenbaum’s paper at:  http://www.csee.umbc.edu/courses/331/papers/eliza.html “Input sentences are analyzed on the basis of  decomposition rules which are triggered by key  words appearing in the input text. Responses are  generated by reassembly rules associated with  selected decomposition rules.” 59 BreakPage Algorithm Identify Keywords: 1. Scan the input sentence to look for words in a dictionary of keywords.  1. Keywords are given a rank, and the highest ranking keyword is considered  2. first Get Decomposition Patterns 2. For each keyword, there is an associated list of decomposition patterns   1. The first decomposition pattern that matches the input sentence is  2. selected.  If the decomposition rule does not match, then the next best ranking  3. keyword is selected (and go back to step 2.1).  Apply Reassembly Pattern 3. For each decomposition rule, there is a set of associated reassembly  1. patterns to generate a response. If a subsequent sentence selects the same decomposition pattern, the  2. next reassembly pattern is used (so the output is not repetitive) If there is no keywords in the input sentence, then generate a canned  4. response 60 BreakPage Example  If the input sentence is:   I am very unhappy these days.  Eliza's response will be:   How long have you been very unhappy these days?  Keyword:   I am  Decomposition pattern:   I am <whatever>  Reassembly Pattern:   How long have you been <whatever>? 61 BreakPage A More Complex Example   Input sentence: "It seems that you hate me".   Keywords: "you" and "me“    Decomposition pattern:   <whatever1>  you  <whatever2>  me  It seems that  you  hate  me  Reassembly pattern  What makes you think I hate you? notice the pronoun  notice the pronoun  (you from the user --> I for Eliza) (me from the user --> you for Eliza) 62 BreakPage Today  Important questions What is artificial intelligence? 1. What is intelligence? 2. Is there a test for intelligence? 3.  What do we do in AI?  History of AI  An example: Eliza 65 BreakPage 