

























































COMP6721 Applied Artificial Intelligence (Winter 2022)

Lab Exercise #2: State Space Search

Question 1 Once upon a time a farmer went to the market and purchased a fox, a goose,
and a bag of beans. On his way home, the farmer came to the bank of a river
and rented a boat. But in crossing the river by boat, the farmer could carry
only himself and a single one of his purchases – the fox, the goose, or the bag
of the beans.
If left alone, the fox would eat the goose, and the goose would eat the beans.
The farmer’s challenge was to carry himself and his purchases to the far bank
of the river, leaving each purchase intact.
Represent this problem as a search problem. Choose a representation for the
problem’s states and:

(a) Write down the initial state
(b) Write down the goal state
(c) Write down all illegal states
(d) Write down the possible actions
(e) Draw the state space for this problem
(f) Find a series of moves to solve this problem

1



Question 2 Assume that S is the initial state and G1 and G2 are the goal states. The
possible actions between states are indicated by arrows. The number labelling
each arc is the actual cost of the action. For example, the cost of going from S
to A is 3. The number in bold italic near each state is the value of the heuristic
function h at that state. For example, the value of h at state C is 3. When all
else is equal, expand states in alphabetical order.

For the following search strategies, show the states visited, along with the open
and closed lists at each step (where it applies).

(a) Breadth-first search
(b) Depth-first search
(c) Iterative deepening depth-first search
(d) Uniform cost search
(e) Hill climbing
(f) Best-first search
(g) Algorithm A

2



Question 3 Exercise from OpenAI:1 Winter is here. You and your friends were tossing
around a Frisbee at the park when you made a wild throw that left the Frisbee
out in the middle of the lake. The water is mostly frozen, but there are a few
holes where the ice has melted. If you step into one of those holes, you’ll fall
into the freezing water. At this time, there’s an international Frisbee shortage,
so it’s absolutely imperative that you navigate across the lake and retrieve the
disc as soon as you can. The surface is described using a rectangular grid like
the figure below:

(a) What are the initial and goal state?
(b) What are the illegal states?
(c) What are the possible actions and what should be their costs?
(d) Draw the state space for this problem.
(e) Find a series of moves to solve this problem.
(f) Perform the following search strategies, show the states visited, along with

the open and closed lists at each step.
I Breadth-first search
II Uniform cost search
III Depth-first search

1https://gym.openai.com/envs/FrozenLake-v0/

3

https://gym.openai.com/envs/FrozenLake-v0/

